                           Improvising a Homeland Defense

                                 Staff Statement No. 17


Members of the Commission, with your help, your staff is prepared to present its findings
regarding national defense and crisis management on 9/11. Our findings represent the
result of our work to date. We remain ready to revise our understanding in light of new
information.

This statement represents the collective effort of a number of members of the staff. John
Farmer, Miles Kara, Dana Hyde, John Azzarello, Kevin Shaeffer, Steve Dunne, Geoffrey
Brown, Lisa Sullivan, and Cate Taylor did most of the investigative work reflected in this
report. In addition, Charles Pereira of the National Transportation Safety Board assisted
greatly in the reconstruction and interpretation of flight data. We are grateful to the
NTSB for its assistance and cooperation. We would also like to acknowledge the
assistance of the Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) in preparing the
visual components of this presentation.

In the course of this investigation, we have received documents and other information
from the Executive Office of the President, and the Departments of Defense,
Transportation, and Homeland Security.

Unless otherwise noted, all times given are rounded to the nearest minute. None of the
audio excerpts you will hear this morning are derived from cockpit voice recorders.

The FAA and NORAD

On 9/11 the defense of U.S. air space depended on close interaction between two federal
agencies: the FAA and the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD).
The last hijacking that involved U.S. air traffic controllers, FAA management, and
military coordination, had occurred in 1993. In order to understand how the two agencies
interacted eight years later, we will review their missions, command-and-control
structures, and working relationship on the morning of 9/11.

FAA Mission and Structure

As of September 11, 2001, the FAA was mandated by law to regulate the safety and
security of civil aviation. From an air traffic controller’s perspective, that meant



                                                                                         1
maintaining a safe distance between airborne aircraft.

Many controllers work at the FAA’s 22 Air Route Traffic Control Centers. These
Centers are grouped under regional offices and coordinate closely with the national Air
Traffic Control System Command Center, commonly referred to as the “Command
Center,” which oversees daily traffic flow within the entire airspace system. That
Command Center is located in Herndon, Virginia. Regional offices report to FAA
headquarters in Washington, DC. FAA headquarters is ultimately responsible for the
management of the National Airspace System. An Operations Center located at FAA
headquarters receives notifications of incidents, including accidents and hijackings.

FAA Centers often receive information and make operational decisions independent of
one another. On 9/11, the four hijacked aircraft were monitored mainly by four of these
FAA Air Route Traffic Control Centers, based in Boston, New York, Cleveland, and
Indianapolis. Each Center thus had part of the knowledge of what was going on across
the system. But it is important to remember that what Boston Center knew was not
necessarily known by the Centers in New York, Cleveland, or Indianapolis.

Controllers track airliners like the four aircraft hijacked on 9/11 primarily by watching
the data from a signal emitted by the aircraft’s transponder equipment. The four aircraft
hijacked on 9/11, like all aircraft traveling above 10,000 feet, were required to emit a
unique transponder signal while in flight.

On 9/11, the terrorists turned off the transponders on three of the four hijacked aircraft.
With the transponder turned off, it may be possible, although more difficult, to track an
aircraft by its primary radar returns. A primary radar return occurs when the signal sent
from a radar site bounces off an object in the sky and indicates the presence of that
object. But primary radar returns do not include the transponder data, which show the
aircraft’s identity and altitude. Controllers at Centers rely on transponder signals and
usually do not display primary radar returns on their scopes. But they can change the
configuration of their radar scopes so they can see primary radar returns. In fact, the
controllers did just that on 9/11 when the transponders were turned off in three of the four
hijacked aircraft. Tower or terminal approach controllers handle a wider variety of
lower-flying aircraft; they often use primary radar returns as well as transponder signals.

NORAD Mission and Structure

NORAD was, and is, responsible for the air defense of the continental United States. The
threat of Soviet bombers diminished significantly after the end of the Cold War, and the
number of NORAD alert sites was reduced. On 9/11 there were only seven left in the
United States, each with two fighter aircraft on alert.

All the hijacked aircraft were in one of NORAD’s Continental U.S. sectors, the Northeast
Air Defense Sector (also known as NEADS). NEADS is based in Rome, New York. On
9/11, it could call on two alert sites, each with one pair of ready fighters. These were the



                                                                                            2
Otis Air National Guard Base in Cape Cod, Massachusetts and Langley Air Force Base in
Langley, Virginia.

NEADS reported to the Continental Region headquarters in Florida, which reported to
NORAD headquarters, in Colorado Springs, Colorado.

Most FAA centers had a civilian employee to coordinate with NORAD, for situations like
training exercises. The agencies had also developed protocols for working together in the
event of a hijacking. As they existed on 9/11, the protocols for the FAA to obtain
military assistance from NORAD required multiple levels of notification and approval at
the highest levels of government.

FAA guidance to controllers on hijack procedures assumed that the aircraft pilot would
notify the controller of the hijack via radio communication or by “squawking” a
transponder code of “7500”—the universal code for a hijack in progress. Controllers
would notify their supervisors, who in turn would inform management all the way up to
FAA headquarters in Washington. Headquarters had a “hijack coordinator” who was the
Director or his designate of the FAA Office of Civil Aviation Security.

If a hijack was confirmed, procedures called for the hijack coordinator on duty to contact
the Pentagon’s National Military Command Center (NMCC) and to ask for a military
“escort aircraft” to follow the flight, report anything unusual, and aid search and rescue in
the event of an emergency. The NMCC would then seek approval from the Office of the
Secretary of Defense to provide military assistance. If there was approval, the orders
would be transmitted down NORAD’s chain of command and direct the sector to launch
a fighter escort.

The protocols did not contemplate an intercept. They assumed the fighter escort would
be discreet, “vectored to a position five miles directly behind the hijacked aircraft,”
where it could perform its mission to monitor the flight path of the aircraft.

In sum, the protocols in place on 9/11 for the FAA and NORAD to respond to a hijacking
presumed that:

(1)    the hijacked aircraft would be readily identifiable and would not attempt to
       disappear;

(2)    there would be time to address the problem through the appropriate FAA and
       NORAD chains of command; and

(3)    the hijacking would take the traditional form, not a suicide hijacking designed to
       convert the aircraft into a guided missile.

On the morning of 9/11, the existing protocol was unsuited in every respect for what was
about to happen. What ensued was the hurried attempt to create an improvised defense



                                                                                            3
by officials who had never encountered or trained against the situation they faced.

Staff Statement No. 4 offered an initial summary of what took place on the four flights.
What we will do now is review how people on the ground comprehended what was
happening to each flight. So, for each flight, we will first describe what the FAA
understood, and then how the military was notified and responded.

American Airlines Flight 11

FAA Awareness

At 8:00 on September 11, 2001, American Airlines Flight 11 began its takeoff roll at
Logan Airport in Boston. A Boeing 767, Flight 11 was bound for Los Angeles with 81
passengers, 11 crew, and 24,000 gallons of jet fuel. By 8:09, it was being monitored by
FAA’s Boston Center (located in New Hampshire). At 8:13, the controller instructed the
flight to “turn twenty degrees right,” which the flight acknowledged. This was the last
transmission to which the flight responded.

Sixteen seconds later, the controller instructed the flight to climb to 35,000 feet. When
there was no response, the controller repeated the command seconds later, and then tried
repeatedly to raise the flight. He used the emergency frequency to try to reach the pilot.
Though there was no response, he kept trying to contact the aircraft.

At 8:21, American 11 turned off its transponder, immediately degrading the available
information about the aircraft. The controller told his supervisor that he thought
something was seriously wrong with the plane. At this point, neither the controller nor
his supervisor suspected a hijacking. The supervisor instructed the controller to follow
standard operating procedures for handling a “no radio” aircraft.

The controller checked to see if American Airlines could establish communication with
American 11. He became even more concerned as its route changed, moving into another
sector’s airspace. Controllers immediately began to move aircraft out of its path, and
searched from aircraft to aircraft in an effort to have another pilot contact American 11.

At 8:24:38, the following transmission came from American 11:

       American 11: We have some planes. Just stay quiet, and you’ll be O.K. We are
       returning to the airport.

The controller only heard something unintelligible; he did not hear the specific words
“[w]e have some planes.” Then the next transmission came seconds later:

       American 11: Nobody move. Everything will be O.K. If you try to make any
       moves, you’ll endanger yourself and the airplane. Just stay quiet.




                                                                                             4
Hearing that, the controller told us he then knew it was a hijacking. The controller
alerted his supervisor, who assigned another controller to assist him, and redoubled
efforts to ascertain the flight’s altitude. Because the controller didn’t understand the
initial transmission, the Manager of Boston Center instructed the Center’s Quality
Assurance Specialist to “pull the tape” of the radio transmission, listen to it closely, and
report back.

Between 8:25 and 8:32, in accordance with the FAA protocol, Boston Center managers
started notifying their chain of command that American 11 had been hijacked. At 8:28,
Boston Center called the Command Center in Herndon, Virginia to advise management
that it believed American 11 had been hijacked and was heading toward New York
Center’s airspace. By this point in time, American 11 had taken a dramatic turn to the
south. At 8:32, the Command Center passed word of a possible hijacking to the
Operations Center at FAA headquarters. The duty officer replied that security personnel
at headquarters had just begun discussing the hijack situation on a conference call with
the New England Regional office.

The Herndon Command Center immediately established a teleconference between
Boston, New York, and Cleveland Centers so that Boston Center could help the others
understand what was happening.

At 8:34, the Boston Center controller received a third transmission from American 11:

       American 11: Nobody move please. We are going back to the airport. Don’t try
       to make any stupid moves.

In the succeeding minutes, controllers were attempting to ascertain the altitude of the
southbound Flight 11.

Military Notification and Response

Boston Center did not follow the routine protocol in seeking military assistance through
the prescribed chain of command. In addition to making notifications within the FAA,
Boston Center took the initiative, at 8:34, to contact the military through the FAA’s Cape
Cod facility. They also tried to obtain assistance from a former alert site in Atlantic City,
unaware it had been phased out. At 8:37:52, Boston Center reached NEADS. This was
the first notification received by the military—at any level—that American 11 had been
hijacked:

       FAA: Hi. Boston Center TMU, we have a problem here. We have a
       hijacked aircraft headed towards New York, and we need you guys to, we need
       someone to scramble some F-16s or something up there, help us out.

       NEADS: Is this real-world or exercise?




                                                                                               5
       FAA: No, this is not an exercise, not a test.

NEADS promptly ordered to battle stations the two F-15 alert aircraft at Otis Air Force
Base, about 153 miles away from New York City. The air defense of America began
with this call.

At NEADS, the reported hijacking was relayed immediately to Battle Commander
Colonel Robert Marr. After ordering the Otis fighters to battle stations, Colonel Marr
phoned Major General Larry Arnold, commanding General of the First Air Force and the
Continental Region. Marr sought authorization to scramble the Otis fighters. General
Arnold instructed Marr “to go ahead and scramble the airplanes, and we’d get permission
later.” General Arnold then called NORAD headquarters to report.

F-15 fighters were ordered scrambled at 8:46 from Otis Air Force Base. But NEADS did
not know where to send the alert fighter aircraft: “I don’t know where I’m scrambling
these guys to. I need a direction, a destination.” Because the hijackers had turned off the
plane’s transponder, NEADS personnel spent the next minutes searching their radar
scopes for the elusive primary radar return. American 11 impacted the World Trade
Center’s North Tower at 8:46:40. Shortly after 8:50, while NEADS personnel were still
trying to locate American 11, word reached them that a plane had hit the World Trade
Center.

Radar data show the Otis fighters were airborne at 8:53. Lacking a target, they were
vectored toward military controlled airspace off the Long Island coast. To avoid New
York area air traffic and uncertain about what to do, the fighters were brought down to
military air space to “hold as needed.” From 9:08 to 9:13, the Otis fighters were in this
holding pattern.

In summary, NEADS received notice of the hijacking nine minutes before it impacted the
north tower. The nine minutes notice was the most the military would receive that
morning of any of the four hijackings.

United Airlines Flight 175

FAA Awareness

United Airlines Flight 175, a Boeing 767 carrying 65 passengers from Boston to Los
Angeles, took off from Logan Airport at 8:14. At 8:37 Boston Center polled United 175,
along with other aircraft, about whether they had seen an “American 767” (American 11),
and United 175’s pilots said they had seen it. The controller turned United 175 away
from it as a safety precaution.

At 8:41, United 175 entered New York Center’s airspace. The controller responsible for
United 175 was unfortunately the same controller assigned the job of tracking the
hijacked American 11. At 8:47, at almost the same time American 11 crashed into the



                                                                                            6
North Tower, United 175’s assigned transponder code changed, then changed again.
These changes were not noticed for several minutes, because the controller was focused
on finding American 11, which had disappeared. At 8:48, a New York Center manager
provided the following report on a Command Center teleconference about American 11,
including information that had been relayed by the airline:

       Manager, New York Center: Okay. This is New York Center. We’re watching
       the airplane. I also had conversation with American Airlines, and they’ve told us
       that they believe that one of their stewardesses was stabbed and that there are
       people in the cockpit that have control of the aircraft, and that’s all the
       information they have right now.

The New York Center controller and manager were unaware that American 11 had
already crashed.

At 8:51, the controller noticed the change in the transponder reading from United 175.
The controller asked United 175 to go back to the proper code. There was no response.
Beginning at 8:52, the controller made repeated attempts to reach the crew of United 175.
Still no response. The controller checked that his radio equipment was working and kept
trying to reach United 175. He contacted another controller at 8:53, and worried that “we
may have a hijack” and that he could not find the aircraft.

Another commercial aircraft in the vicinity then radioed in with “reports over the radio of
a commuter plane hitting the World Trade Center.” The controller spent the next several
minutes handing off the other flights on his scope to other controllers and moving aircraft
out of the way of the unidentified aircraft (believed to be United 175) as it moved
southwest and then turned northeast toward New York City.

At approximately 8:55, the controller-in-charge notified a New York Center manager that
she believed United 175 had also been hijacked. The manager tried to notify the regional
managers and was told that the managers were discussing a hijacked aircraft (presumably
American 11) and refused to be disturbed. At 8:58, the New York Center controller
searching for United 175 told another New York controller “we might have a hijack over
here, two of them.”

Between 9:01 and 9:02, a manager from New York Center told the Command Center in
Herndon:

       Manager, New York Center: We have several situations going on here. It’s
       escalating big, big time. We need to get the military involved with us . . . .

       We’re, we’re involved with something else, we have other aircraft that may have
       a similar situation going on here. . . .

The “other aircraft” New York Center referred to was United 175. Evidence indicates



                                                                                          7
that this conversation was the only notice received prior to the second crash by either
FAA headquarters or the Herndon Command Center that there was a second hijack.

While Command Center was told about this “other aircraft” at 9:01, New York Center
contacted New York terminal approach control and asked for help in locating United 175.

       Terminal: I got somebody who keeps coasting but it looks like he’s going into
       one of the small airports down there.

       Center: Hold on a second. I’m trying to bring him up here and get you— There
       he is right there. Hold on.

       Terminal: Got him just out of 9,500—9,000 now.

       Center: Do you know who he is?

       Terminal: We’re just, we just we don’t know who he is. We’re just picking him
       up now.

       Center (at 9:02): Alright. Heads up man, it looks like another one coming in.

The controllers observed the plane in a rapid descent; the radar data terminated over
lower Manhattan. At 9:03:02, United 175 crashed into the South Tower.

Meanwhile, a manager from Boston Center reported that they had deciphered what they
had heard in one of the first hijacker transmissions from American 11:

       Boston Center: Hey… you still there?

       New England Region: Yes, I am.

       Boston Center: I’m gonna reconfirm with, with downstairs, but the, as far as the
       tape…seemed to think the guy said that “we have planes.” Now, I don’t know if it
       was because it was the accent, or if there’s more than one, but I’m gonna, I’m
       gonna reconfirm that for you, and I’ll get back to you real quick. Okay?

       New England Region: Appreciate it.

       Unidentified Female Voice: They have what?

       Boston Center: Planes, as in plural.

       Boston Center: It sounds like, we’re talking to New York, that there’s another one
       aimed at the World Trade Center.




                                                                                          8
       New England Region: There’s another aircraft?

       Boston Center: A second one just hit the Trade Center.

       New England Region: Okay. Yeah, we gotta get—we gotta alert the military real
       quick on this.

Boston Center immediately advised the New England Region that it was going to stop all
aircraft scheduled to depart from any airport within Boston Center. At 9:05, Boston
Center confirmed for both FAA Command Center and New England Region that the
hijackers aboard American 11 said “we have planes.” At the same time, New York
Center declared “ATC zero”—meaning that aircraft were not permitted to depart from,
arrive at, or travel through New York Center’s airspace until further notice.

Within minutes of the second impact, Boston Center’s Operations Manager instructed all
air traffic controllers in his center to use the radio frequencies to inform all aircraft in
Boston Center of the events unfolding in New York and to advise aircraft to heighten
cockpit security. Boston Center asked Herndon Command Center to issue a similar
cockpit security alert to all aircraft nationwide. We have found no evidence to suggest
that Command Center managers instructed any Centers to issue a cockpit security alert.

Military Notification and Response

The first indication that the NORAD air defenders had of the second hijacked aircraft,
United 175, came in a phone call from New York Center to NEADS at 9:03. The notice
came in at about the time the plane was hitting the South Tower.

At 9:08, the Mission Crew Commander at NEADS learned of the second explosion at the
World Trade Center and decided against holding the fighters in military air space away
from Manhattan:

       Mission Crew Commander, NEADS: This is what I foresee that we probably
       need to do. We need to talk to FAA. We need to tell ‘em if this stuff is gonna keep
       on going, we need to take those fighters, put ‘em over Manhattan. That’s best
       thing, that’s the best play right now. So coordinate with the FAA. Tell ‘em if
       there’s more out there, which we don’t know, let’s get ‘em over Manhattan. At
       least we got some kind of play.

The FAA cleared the air space. The Otis fighters were sent to Manhattan. A Combat Air
Patrol was established over the city at 9:25.

Because the Otis fighters had expended a great deal of fuel in flying first to military air
space and then to New York, the battle commanders were concerned about refueling.
NEADS considered scrambling alert fighters from Langley Air Force Base in Virginia to
New York, to provide back-up. The Langley fighters were placed on battle stations at



                                                                                           9
9:09. NORAD had no indication that any other plane had been hijacked.

The following is a time lapsed depiction of the flight paths of American 11 and
United 175.

American Airlines Flight 77

FAA Awareness

American 77 began its takeoff roll from Dulles International Airport at 8:20. The flight
was handed off routinely from Washington Center to Indianapolis Center at
approximately 8:40.

American 77 was acknowledged by the Indianapolis controller, who had fourteen other
planes in his sector at the time. The controller instructed the aircraft to climb and, at 8:50,
cleared it to its next navigational aid. American 77 acknowledged. This was the last
transmission from American 77.

At 8:54, American 77 began deviating from its flight plan, first with a slight turn toward
the south. Two minutes later it disappeared completely from Indianapolis radar.

The controller tracking American 77 told us he first noticed the aircraft turning to the
southwest, and then saw the data disappear. The controller looked for primary radar
returns. He searched along its projected flight path and the airspace to the southwest
where it had started to turn. No primary targets appeared. He tried the radios, first
calling the aircraft directly, then the airline. Again there was nothing. At this point, the
Indianapolis controller had no knowledge of the situation in New York. He did not know
that other aircraft had been hijacked. He believed American 77 had experienced serious
electrical and/or mechanical failure, and was gone.

Shortly after 9:00, Indianapolis Center started notifying other agencies that American 77
was missing and had possibly crashed. At 9:08, Indianapolis Center contacted Air Force
Search and Rescue at Langley Air Force Base, Virginia, and told them to look out for a
downed aircraft. They also contacted the West Virginia State Police, and asked whether
they had any reports of a downed aircraft. At 9:09, they reported the loss of contact to
the FAA regional center, which passed this information to FAA headquarters at 9:24.

By 9:20, Indianapolis Center learned that there were other hijacked aircraft in the system,
and began to doubt their initial assumption that American 77 had crashed. A discussion
of this concern between the manager at Indianapolis and the Command Center in
Herndon prompted the Command Center to notify some FAA field facilities that
American 77 was lost. By 9:21, the Command Center, some FAA field facilities, and
American Airlines had started to search for American 77. They feared it had been
hijacked. At 9:25, the Command Center advised FAA headquarters that American 77
was lost in Indianapolis Center’s airspace, that Indianapolis Center had no primary radar



                                                                                            10
track, and was looking for the aircraft.

The failure to find a primary radar return for American 77 led us to investigate this issue
further. Radar reconstructions performed after 9/11 reveal that FAA radar equipment
tracked the flight from the moment its transponder was turned off at 8:56. But for eight
minutes and thirteen seconds, between 8:56 and 9:05, this primary radar information on
American 77 was not displayed to controllers at Indianapolis Center. The reasons are
technical, arising from the way the software processed radar information, as well as from
poor primary radar coverage where American 77 was flying.

According to the radar reconstruction, American 77 re-emerged as a primary target on
Indianapolis Center radar scopes at 9:05, east of its last known position. The target
remained in Indianapolis Center’s airspace for another six minutes, then crossed into the
western portion of Washington Center’s airspace at 9:10. As Indianapolis Center
continued searching for the aircraft, two managers and the controller responsible for
American 77 looked to the west and southwest along the flight’s projected path, not
east—where the aircraft was now heading. The managers did not instruct other
controllers at Indianapolis Center to turn on their primary radar coverage to join in the
search for American 77.

In sum, Indianapolis Center never saw Flight 77 turn around. By the time it reappeared
in primary radar coverage, controllers had either stopped looking for the aircraft because
they thought it had crashed or were looking toward the west. In addition, while the
Command Center learned Flight 77 was missing, neither it nor FAA headquarters issued
an “all points bulletin” to surrounding centers to search for primary radar targets.
American 77 traveled undetected for 36 minutes on a course heading due east for
Washington, DC.

By 9:25, FAA’s Herndon Command Center and FAA headquarters knew the following.
They knew two aircraft had crashed into the World Trade Center. They knew American
77 was lost. They knew that a hijacker on board American 11 had said “we have some
planes,” and concerns over the safety of other aircraft began to mount. A manager at the
Herndon Command Center asked FAA headquarters if they wanted to order a
“nationwide ground stop.” While executives at FAA headquarters discussed it, the
Command Center went ahead and ordered one anyway at 9:25.

The Command Center kept looking for American 77. At 9:21, it advised the Dulles
terminal control facility, which urged its controllers to look for primary targets. At 9:32,
they found one. Several of the Dulles controllers “observed a primary radar target
tracking eastbound at a high rate of speed” and notified Reagan Airport. FAA personnel
at both Reagan and Dulles airports notified the Secret Service. The identity or aircraft
type was unknown.

Reagan Airport controllers then vectored an unarmed National Guard C-130H cargo
aircraft, which had just taken off en route to Minnesota, to identify and follow the



                                                                                          11
suspicious aircraft. The C-130H pilot spotted it, identified it as a Boeing 757, attempted
to follow its path, and at 9:38, seconds after impact, reported to Washington Tower:
“looks like that aircraft crashed into the Pentagon sir.”

Military Notification and Response

NORAD did not know about the search for American 77. Instead, they heard once again
about a plane that no longer existed, American 11. At 9:21, NEADS received a report
from the FAA:

       FAA: Military, Boston Center. I just had a report that American 11 is still in the
       air, and it’s on its way towards—heading towards Washington.

       NEADS: Okay. American 11 is still in the air?

       FAA: Yes.

       NEADS: On its way towards Washington?

       FAA: That was another—it was evidently another aircraft that hit the tower.
       That’s the latest report we have.

       NEADS: Okay.

       FAA: I’m going to try to confirm an ID for you, but I would assume he’s
       somewhere over, uh, either New Jersey or somewhere further south.

       NEADS: Okay. So American 11 isn’t the hijack at all then, right?

       FAA: No, he is a hijack.

       NEADS: He—American 11 is a hijack?

       FAA: Yes.

       NEADS: And he’s heading into Washington?

       FAA: Yes. This could be a third aircraft.

The mention of a “third aircraft” was not a reference to American 77. There was
confusion at that moment in the FAA. Two planes had struck the World Trade Center,
and Boston Center had heard from FAA headquarters in Washington that American 11
was still airborne. We have been unable to identify the source of this mistaken FAA
information.




                                                                                         12
The NEADS technician who took this call from the FAA immediately passed the word to
the Mission Crew Commander. He reported to the NEADS Battle Commander:

       Mission Crew Commander, NEADS: Okay, uh, American Airlines is still
       airborne. Eleven, the first guy, he’s heading towards Washington. Okay? I think
       we need to scramble Langley right now. And I’m gonna take the fighters from
       Otis, try to chase this guy down if I can find him.

The Mission Crew Commander at NEADS issued an order at 9:23: “Okay … scramble
Langley. Head them towards the Washington area.” That order was processed and
transmitted to Langley Air Force Base at 9:24, and radar data show the Langley fighters
were airborne at 9:30.

NEADS decided to keep the Otis fighters over New York. The heading of the Langley
fighters was adjusted to send them to the Baltimore area. The Mission Crew Commander
explained to us that the purpose was to position the Langley fighters between the reported
southbound American 11 and the nation’s capital.

At the suggestion of the Boston Center’s military liaison, NEADS contacted the FAA’s
Washington Center to ask about American 11. In the course of the conversation, a
Washington Center manager informed NEADS that “We’re looking—we also lost
American 77.” The time was 9:34. This was the first notice to the military that
American 77 was missing, and it had come by chance. If NEADS had not placed that
call, the NEADS air defenders would have received no information whatsoever that
American 77 was even missing, although the FAA had been searching for it. No one at
FAA Command Center or headquarters ever asked for military assistance with American
77.

At 9:36, the FAA’s Boston Center called NEADS and relayed the discovery about the
aircraft closing in on Washington, an aircraft that still had not been linked with the
missing American 77. The FAA told NEADS: “Latest report. Aircraft VFR [Visual
Flight Rules] six miles southeast of the White House. … Six, southwest. Six, southwest
of the White House, deviating away.” This startling news prompted the Mission Crew
Commander at NEADS to take immediate control of the airspace to clear a flight path for
the Langley fighters: “Okay, we’re going to turn it … crank it up. … Run them to the
White House.” He then discovered, to his surprise, that the Langley fighters were not
headed north toward the Baltimore area as instructed, but east over the ocean. “I don’t
care how many windows you break,” he said. “Damn it… Okay. Push them back.”

The Langley fighters were heading east, not north, for three reasons. First, unlike a
normal scramble order, this order did not include a distance to the target, or the target’s
location. Second, a “generic” flight plan incorrectly led the Langley fighters to believe
they were ordered to fly due east (090) for 60 miles. The purpose of the generic flight
plan was to quickly get the aircraft airborne and out of local airspace. Third, the lead
pilot and local FAA controller incorrectly assumed the flight plan instruction to go “090



                                                                                          13
for 60” was newer guidance that superseded the original scramble order.

After the 9:36 call to NEADS about the unidentified aircraft a few miles from the White
House, the Langley fighters were ordered to Washington, DC. Controllers at NEADS
located an unknown primary radar track, but “it kind of faded” over Washington. The
time was 9:38. The Pentagon had been struck by American 77 at 9:37:46. The Langley
fighters were approximately 150 miles away.

Right after the Pentagon was hit, NEADS learned of another possible hijacked aircraft. It
was an aircraft that in fact had not been hijacked at all. After the second World Trade
Center crash, Boston Center managers recognized both aircraft were transcontinental, 767
jetliners that departed Logan Airport. Remembering the “we have some planes” remark,
Boston Center had guessed that Delta 1989 might also be hijacked. Boston Center called
NEADS at 9:41 and identified Delta 1989, a 767 jet that departed Logan Airport destined
for Las Vegas, as a possible hijack. NEADS warned the FAA’s Cleveland air traffic
control center to watch Delta 1989. The FAA’s Herndon Command Center and FAA
headquarters were watching it too. During the course of the morning, there were multiple
erroneous reports of hijacked aircraft in the system. The report of American 11 heading
south was the first; Delta 1989 was the second.

NEADS never lost track of Delta 1989, and even launched fighter aircraft from Ohio and
Michigan to intercept it. The flight never turned off its transponder. NEADS soon
learned that the aircraft was not hijacked, and tracked Delta 1989 as it reversed course
over Toledo, headed east, and landed in Cleveland. But another aircraft was heading
toward Washington.

The following is a time lapsed depiction of the flight path of American 77.

United Airlines Flight 93

FAA Awareness

United 93 took off from Newark at 8:42. It was more than 40 minutes late. At 9:28,
United 93 acknowledged a transmission from the controller. This was the last normal
contact the FAA had with United 93.

Less than a minute later, the Cleveland controller and the pilots of aircraft in the vicinity
heard “a radio transmission of unintelligible sounds of possible screaming or a struggle
from an unknown origin …”

The controller responded, seconds later: “Somebody call Cleveland?” This was
followed by a second radio transmission, with sounds of screaming and someone yelling
“Get out of here, get out of here,” again from an unknown source. The Cleveland Center
controllers began to try to identify the possible source of the transmissions, and noticed
that United 93 had descended some 700 feet. The controller attempted again to raise



                                                                                           14
United 93 several times, with no response. At 9:30, the controller began to poll the other
flights on his frequency to determine if they heard the screaming; several said they had.

At 9:32, a third radio transmission came over the frequency: “Keep remaining sitting.
We have a bomb on board.” The controller understood, but chose to respond: “Calling
Cleveland center, you’re unreadable. Say again, slowly.” He notified his supervisor,
who passed the notice up the chain of command. By 9:34, word of the hijacking had
reached FAA headquarters.

FAA headquarters had by this time established an open line of communication with the
Command Center at Herndon and instructed it to poll all the Centers about suspect
aircraft. The Command Center executed the request and, a minute later, Cleveland
Center reported that “United 93 may have a bomb on board.” That was the information
Command Center relayed to FAA headquarters at 9:34.

Between 9:34 and 9:38, the controller observed United 93 climbing to 40,700 feet and
immediately moved several aircraft out of its way. The controller continued to try to
contact United 93, and asked whether the pilot could confirm that he had been hijacked.
There was no response.

Then, at 9:39, a fifth radio transmission came over the radio frequency from United 93:

       Ziad Jarrah: Uh, is the captain. Would like you all to remain seated. There is a
       bomb on board and are going back to the airport, and to have our demands
       [unintelligible]. Please remain quiet.

The controller responded: “United 93, understand you have a bomb on board. Go
ahead.” The flight did not respond. At 9:41, Cleveland Center lost United 93’s
transponder signal. The controller located it on primary radar, matched its position with
visual sightings from other aircraft, and tracked the flight as it turned east, then south.

At about 9:36, Cleveland Center asked Command Center specifically whether someone
had requested the military to launch fighter aircraft to intercept United 93. Cleveland
Center offered to contact a nearby military base. Command Center replied that FAA
personnel well above them in the chain of command had to make that decision and were
working the issue.

From 9:34 to 10:08, a Command Center manager updated executives at FAA
headquarters on the progress of United 93. During this time, the plane reversed course
over Ohio and headed toward Washington.

At 9:42, Command Center learned from television news reports that a plane had struck
the Pentagon. The Command Center’s National Operations Manager, Ben Sliney,
ordered all FAA facilities to instruct all airborne aircraft to land at the nearest airport.
This was a totally unprecedented order. The air traffic control system handled it with



                                                                                               15
great skill, as about 4,500 commercial and general aviation aircraft soon landed without
incident.

At 9:46 and again two minutes later, Command Center updated FAA headquarters that
United 93 was now “twenty-nine minutes out of Washington, DC.”

A minute after that, at 9:49, 13 minutes after getting the question from Cleveland Center
about military help, Command Center suggested that someone at headquarters should
decide whether to request military assistance:

       FAA Headquarters: They’re pulling Jeff away to go talk about United 93.

       Command Center: Uh, do we want to think about, uh, scrambling aircraft?

       FAA Headquarters: Uh, God, I don’t know.

       Command Center: Uh, that’s a decision somebody’s gonna have to make
       probably in the next ten minutes.

       FAA Headquarters: Uh, ya know everybody just left the room.

At 9:53, FAA headquarters informed Command Center that the Deputy Director for Air
Traffic Services was talking to Deputy Administrator Monte Belger about scrambling
aircraft. Then Command Center informed headquarters they lost track of United 93 over
the Pittsburgh area. Within seconds, Command Center received a visual report from
another aircraft, and informed headquarters that the aircraft was 20 miles northwest of
Johnstown. United 93 was spotted by another aircraft, and, at 10:01, Command Center
advised FAA headquarters that one of the aircraft had seen United 93 “waving his
wings.” The aircraft had witnessed the radical gyrations in what we believe was the
hijackers’ effort to defeat the passenger assault. United 93 crashed in Pennsylvania at
10:03:11, 125 miles from Washington, DC. The precise crash time has been the subject
of some dispute. The 10:03:11 time is supported by evidence from the staff’s radar
analysis, the flight data recorder, NTSB analysis, and infrared satellite data.

Five minutes later, Command Center forwarded this update to headquarters:

       Command Center: O.K. Uh, there is now on that United 93.

       FAA Headquarters: Yes.

       Command Center: There is a report of black smoke in the last position I gave
       you, fifteen miles south of Johnstown.

       FAA Headquarters: From the airplane or from the ground?




                                                                                        16
       Command Center: Uh, they’re speculating it’s from the aircraft.

       FAA Headquarters: Okay.

       Command Center: Uh, who, it hit the ground. That’s what they’re speculating,
       that’s speculation only.

The aircraft that spotted the “black smoke” was the same unarmed Air National Guard
cargo plane that had seen American 77 crash into the Pentagon 26 minutes earlier. It had
resumed its flight to Minnesota and saw the smoke from the crash of United 93, less than
two minutes after the plane went down. At 10:17, Command Center advised
headquarters of its conclusion that United 93 had indeed crashed.

Despite the discussions about military assistance, no one from FAA headquarters
requested military assistance regarding United 93. Nor did any manager at FAA
headquarters pass any of the information it had about United 93 to the military.

Military Notification and Response

NEADS first received a call about United 93 from the military liaison at Cleveland
Center, at 10:07. Unaware that the aircraft had already crashed, Cleveland passed to
NEADS the aircraft’s last known latitude and longitude. NEADS was never able to
locate United 93 on radar because it was already in the ground.

At the same time, the NEADS Mission Crew Commander was dealing with the arrival of
the Langley fighters over Washington, DC. He was sorting out what their orders were
with respect to potential targets. Shortly after 10:10, and having no knowledge either that
United 93 had been heading toward Washington, DC or that it had crashed, the Mission
Crew Commander explicitly instructed that the Langley fighters did not have “clearance
to shoot” aircraft over the nation’s capital.

The news of a reported bomb on board United 93 spread quickly at NEADS. The air
defenders searched for United 93’s primary radar return and tried to locate assets to
scramble toward the plane. NEADS called Washington Center to report:

       NEADS: I also want to give you a heads-up, Washington.

       FAA (DC): Go ahead.

       NEADS: United nine three, have you got information on that yet?

       FAA: Yeah, he’s down.

       NEADS: He’s down?




                                                                                        17
       FAA: Yes.

       NEADS: When did he land? ‘Cause we have got confirmation—

       FAA: He did not land.

       NEADS: Oh, he’s down? Down?

       FAA: Yes. Somewhere up northeast of Camp David.

       NEADS: Northeast of Camp David.

       FAA: That’s the last report. They don’t know exactly where.

The time of notification of the crash of United 93 was 10:15. The NEADS air defenders
never located the flight or followed it on their radar scopes. The flight had already
crashed by the time they learned it was hijacked.

The following is a time lapsed depiction of United 93.

To provide an overview of the materials presented thus far, the following is a time lapsed
depiction of all four hijacked flights and the military's response.

Conflicting Accounts

In May 2003 public testimony before this Commission, NORAD officials stated that, at
9:16, NEADS received hijack notification of United 93 from the FAA. This statement
was incorrect. There was no hijack to report at 9:16. United 93 was proceeding normally
at that time.

In this same public testimony, NORAD officials stated that, at 9:24, NEADS received
notification of the hijacking of American 77. This statement was also incorrect. The
notice NEADS received at 9:24 was not about American 77. It was notification that
American 11 had not hit the World Trade Center and was heading for Washington, DC.
A 9:24 entry in a NEADS event log records: “American Airlines #N334AA hijacked.”
This is the tail number of American 11.

In their testimony, and in other public statements, NORAD officials also stated that the
Langley fighters were scrambled to respond to the notifications about American 77
and/or United 93. These statements were incorrect as well. The report of American 11
heading south as the cause of the Langley scramble is reflected not just in taped
conversations at NEADS, but in taped conversations at FAA centers, on chat logs
compiled at NEADS, Continental Region headquarters, and NORAD, and in other
records.




                                                                                           18
Yet this response to a phantom aircraft, American 11, is not recounted in a single public
timeline or statement issued by FAA or DOD. Instead, since 9/11, the scramble of the
Langley fighters has been described as a response to the reported hijacking of American
77, or United 93, or some combination of the two. This inaccurate account created the
appearance that the Langley scramble was a logical response to an actual hijacked
aircraft.

Not only was the scramble prompted by the mistaken information about American 11, but
NEADS never even received notice that American 77 was hijacked. It was notified at
9:34 that American 77 was lost. Then, minutes later, NEADS was told that an unknown
plane was six miles southwest of the White House. Only then did the already scrambled
airplanes start moving directly to Washington, DC.

Thus the military did not have 14 minutes to respond to American 77, as testimony last
year suggested. It had at most one or two minutes to respond to the unidentified plane
approaching Washington, and the fighters were in the wrong place to be able to help.
They had been responding to a report about an aircraft that did not exist.

Nor did the military have 47 minutes to respond to United 93, as would be implied by the
account that it received notice about it at 9:16. By the time the military learned about the
flight, it had crashed.

At one point the FAA projected that United 93 would reach Washington, DC at about
10:15. By that time the Langley fighters were over Washington. But, as late as 10:10,
the operating orders were still “negative clearance to shoot” regarding non-responsive
targets over Washington, DC. The word of the authorization to shoot down hijacked
civilian aircraft did not reach NEADS until 10:31.

We do not believe that an accurate understanding of the events of that morning reflects
discredit on the operational personnel from NEADS or FAA facilities. The NEADS
commanders and floor officers were proactive in seeking information, and made the best
judgments they could based on the information they received. Individual FAA
controllers, facility managers, and Command Center managers thought “outside the box”
in recommending a nationwide alert, in ground-stopping local traffic, and, ultimately, in
deciding to land all aircraft and executing that unprecedented order flawlessly.

In fact, it was inaccurate accounts of what happened that created questions about
supposed delays in the military’s interception of the hijacked aircraft. They also had the
effect of deflecting questions about the military’s capacity to obtain timely and accurate
information from its own resources. They overstated the FAA’s ability to provide the
military timely and useful information that morning.

We now turn to the timing and circumstances of that shoot down authorization—and the
role of national leadership in the events that morning.




                                                                                          19
On the morning of 9/11 there was no one decisionmaker in Washington with perfect
information. Various people had various pieces of information, and they were in
different locations. The President was initially at an elementary school in Florida, and
then en route to Louisiana. At the White House, other decisionmakers gathered in either
the White House Situation Room or the underground shelter, formally known as the
Presidential Emergency Operations Center. At the Department of Defense, the center of
crisis management was the Pentagon’s National Military Command Center (NMCC). At
the FAA, two locations were pivotal: Washington headquarters and the Command Center
in Herndon.

National Decisionmaking from 8:46 to 9:03

When American 11 struck the World Trade Center at 8:46, no one in the White House or
traveling with the President knew that it had been hijacked. Immediately afterward, duty
officers at the White House and Pentagon began notifying senior officials what had
happened.

Even within FAA, the Administrator, Jane Garvey, and her deputy had not been told of a
confirmed hijacking before they learned from television that a plane had crashed. Others
in the agency were aware, as we explained earlier in this statement.

In Florida, the President’s motorcade was just arriving at the Emma E. Booker
Elementary School where President Bush was to read to a class and talk about education.
White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card told us he was standing with the President
outside the classroom when Senior Advisor to the President Karl Rove first informed
them that a small, twin engine plane had crashed into the World Trade Center. The
President’s reaction was that the incident must have been caused by pilot error.

At 8:55, before entering the classroom, the President spoke to National Security Advisor
Condoleezza Rice, who was at the White House. She recalled first telling the President it
was a twin engine aircraft, then that it was commercial, saying “that’s all we know right
now, Mr. President.”

At the White House, the Vice President had just sat down for a meeting when his
assistant told him to turn on his television because a plane had struck the North Tower of
the World Trade Center. The Vice President was wondering “how the hell a plane could
hit the World Trade Center” when he saw the second aircraft strike the South Tower.

The Agencies Confer

When they learned a second plane had struck the World Trade Center, nearly everyone in
the White House told us they immediately knew it was not an accident. The Secret
Service initiated a number of security enhancements around the White House Complex.
The officials who issued these orders did not know that there were additional hijacked
aircraft, or that one such aircraft was en route to Washington. These measures were



                                                                                        20
precautionary steps because of the strikes in New York. Officials across the government
struggled to find out what was going on.

The FAA, the White House, and the Defense Department each initiated a multi-agency
teleconference before 9:30. The FAA, following its protocol, set up a hijacking
teleconference at approximately 9:20 with several agencies, including the Defense
Department. However, FAA and Defense Department participants in this teleconference
told us the call played no role in coordinating the military and FAA response to the
attacks of 9/11.

The White House Situation Room initiated a video teleconference, chaired by Richard
Clarke. While important, it had no immediate effect on the emergency defense efforts.

The Defense Department’s NMCC initiated a key teleconference that started at 9:29 as a
“Significant Event Conference” and then, at 9:37, resumed as an Air Threat Conference
call. This teleconference lasted over eight hours. The President, Vice President,
Secretary of Defense, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Deputy National
Security Advisor all participated in the Air Threat Conference at various points in the
day, as did military personnel from the White House underground shelter. So did the
President’s military aide on Air Force One.

Operators worked feverishly to include the FAA in this teleconference, but they had
equipment problems and difficulty finding secure phone numbers. NORAD asked three
times before 10:03 to confirm the presence of FAA on the conference, to provide an
update on hijackings. The FAA did not join the call until 10:17. The FAA representative
who joined the call had no familiarity with or responsibility for a hijack situation, had no
access to decisionmakers, and had none of the information available to senior FAA
officials by that time.

We found no evidence that, at this critical time, during the morning of September 11,
NORAD’s top commanders, in Florida or Cheyenne Mountain, ever coordinated with
their counterparts at FAA headquarters to improve situational awareness and organize a
common response. Lower-level officials improvised—the FAA’s Boston Center
bypassing the chain of command to contact NEADS. But the highest level Defense
Department officials relied on the NMCC’s Air Threat Conference, in which FAA did not
meaningfully participate.

At 9:39, the NMCC’s deputy director for operations, a military officer, opened the call
from the Pentagon, which had just been struck by a Boeing 757 airliner. He began: “An
air attack against North America may be in progress. NORAD, what’s the situation?”

NORAD said it had conflicting reports. Its latest information was “of a possible hijacked


 All times given for this conference call are our estimates, which we believe to be accurate within a ±3
minute margin of error.



                                                                                                           21
aircraft taking off out of JFK en route to Washington D.C. . . . .”

The NMCC mentioned reports of a crash into the mall side of the Pentagon and requested
that the Secretary of Defense be added to the conference.

At 9:44, NORAD briefed the conference on the possible hijacking of Delta Flight 1989.
Two minutes later the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Office of the Vice
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported that they were still trying to track down the
Secretary and Vice Chairman, and bring them into the conference. The Chairman was
out of the country.

At 9:48, a representative from the underground shelter at the White House asked if there
were any indications of another hijacked aircraft. The NMCC deputy director for
operations mentioned the Delta flight and concluded “that would be the fourth possible
hijack.” At 9:49, the commander of NORAD directed all air sovereignty aircraft to battle
stations fully armed.

At 9:59, an Air Force Lieutenant Colonel working in the White House Military Office
joined the conference and stated that he had just talked to Deputy National Security
Advisor Steve Hadley. The White House requested: (1) the implementation of continuity
of government measures, (2) fighter escorts for Air Force One, and (3) the establishment
of a fighter combat air patrol over Washington, DC.

The President and the Vice President

The President was seated in a classroom of second graders when, at approximately 9:05,
Andrew Card whispered to him: “A second plane hit the second tower. America is under
attack.” The President told us his instinct was to project calm, not to have the country see
an excited reaction at a moment of crisis. The national press corps was standing behind
the children in the classroom; he saw their phones and pagers start to ring. The President
felt he should project strength and calm until he could better understand what was
happening.

The President remained in the classroom for another five to seven minutes, while the
children continued reading. He then returned to a holding room shortly before 9:15,
where he was briefed by staff and saw television coverage. He then spoke to Vice
President Cheney, Dr. Rice, Governor Pataki, and FBI Director Mueller. He decided to
make a brief statement from the school before leaving for the airport. The Secret Service
told us they were anxious to move the President to a safer location, but did not think it
imperative for him to run out the door.

Between 9:15 and 9:30, the staff was busy arranging a return to Washington, while the
President consulted his senior advisers about his remarks. No one in the traveling party
had any information during this time that other aircraft were hijacked or missing. As far
as we know, no one was in contact with the Pentagon. The focus was on the President's



                                                                                         22
statement to the nation. No decisions were made during this time, other than the decision
to return to Washington.

The President's motorcade departed at 9:35, and arrived at the airport between 9:42 and
9:45. During the ride the President learned about the attack on the Pentagon. He boarded
the aircraft, asked the Secret Service about the safety of his family, and called the Vice
President. According to notes of the call, at about 9:45 the President told the Vice
President: “Sounds like we have a minor war going on here, I heard about the Pentagon.
We're at war….somebody's going to pay.”

About this time Card, the lead Secret Service agent, the President's military aide, and the
pilot were conferring on a possible destination for Air Force One. The Secret Service
agent felt strongly that the situation in Washington was too unstable to return. Card
agreed. The President, however, needed convincing. All witnesses agreed that the
President strongly wanted to return to Washington and only grudgingly agreed to go
elsewhere. The issue was still undecided when the President conferred with the Vice
President at about the time Air Force One was taking off. The Vice President recalled
urging the President not to come back to Washington. Air Force One departed at
approximately 9:55, with no destination at take-off. The objective was to get up in the
air—as fast and as high as possible—and then decide where to go.

News of an incoming aircraft (later discovered to be American 77) prompted the Secret
Service to order the evacuation of the Vice President just before 9:36. The Vice
President entered the underground tunnel that led to the shelter at 9:37.

Once inside, Vice President Cheney and the agents paused in an area of the tunnel that
had a secure phone, a bench, and a television. The Vice President asked to speak to the
President, but it took time for the call to be connected. He learned in the tunnel that the
Pentagon had been hit, and saw television coverage of smoke coming from the building.

The Secret Service logged Mrs. Cheney’s arrival at the White House at 9:52. She joined
her husband in the tunnel. According to contemporaneous notes, at 9:55 the Vice
President was still on the phone with the President advising that three planes were
missing and one had hit the Pentagon. We believe this is the same call initiated close to
the time Air Force One took off, in which the Vice President joined the chorus of
advisers urging the President not to return to Washington. The call ended. She and the
Vice President moved from the tunnel to the shelter conference room.

United 93 and the Shootdown Order

There was not an open line of communication between the President and Vice President
on the morning of 9/11, but rather a series of calls between the two leaders. The Vice
President remembered placing a call to the President just after entering the shelter
conference room. There is conflicting evidence as to when the Vice President arrived in
the shelter conference room. We have concluded, after reviewing all the available



                                                                                          23
evidence, that the Vice President arrived in the shelter conference room shortly before
10:00, perhaps at 9:58. The Vice President recalls being told, just after his arrival, that an
Air Force combat air patrol (CAP) was up over Washington. At 9:59, a White House
request for such a CAP was communicated to the military through the Air Threat
Conference.

The Vice President states that the purpose of his call to the President was to discuss the
rules of engagement for the CAP. He recalled he felt it did not do any good to put the
CAP up there unless the pilots had instructions to tell them whether they were authorized
to shoot if the plane would not divert. He said the President signed off on that concept.
The President said he remembered such a conversation, and that it reminded him of when
he had been a fighter pilot. The President emphasized to us that he had authorized the
shoot down of hijacked aircraft.

The Vice President’s military aide told us he believed the Vice President spoke to the
President just after entering the conference room, but he did not hear what they said.
Rice, who entered the conference room shortly after the Vice President and sat next to
him, recalled hearing the Vice President inform the President that, “Sir, the CAPs are up.
Sir, they’re going to want to know what to do.” Then she recalled hearing him say, “Yes
sir.” She believed this conversation occurred a few minutes, perhaps five, after they
entered the conference room.

We believe this call would have taken place some time before 10:10 to 10:15. Among
the sources that reflect other important events that morning there is no documentary
evidence for this call, although the relevant sources are incomplete. Others nearby who
were taking notes, such as the Vice President’s Chief of Staff, Scooter Libby, who sat
next to him, and Mrs. Cheney, did not note a call between the President and Vice
President immediately after the Vice President entered the conference room.

At 10:02, the communicators in the shelter began receiving reports from the Secret
Service of an inbound aircraft—presumably hijacked—heading toward Washington.
That aircraft was United 93.

The Secret Service was getting this information directly from the FAA, through its links
to that agency. The Service’s operations center and their FAA contact were tracking the
progress of the aircraft on a display that showed its projected path, not its actual radar
return. Thus, for a time, they were not aware the aircraft was going down in
Pennsylvania.

At some time between 10:10 and 10:15, a military aide told the Vice President and others
that the aircraft was 80 miles out. Vice President Cheney was asked for authority to
engage the aircraft.

The Vice President’s reaction was described as quick and decisive: “in about the time it
takes a batter to decide to swing.” He authorized fighter aircraft to engage the inbound



                                                                                           24
plane. He told us this was based on his prior conversation with the President. The
military aide returned a few minutes later, probably between 10:12 and 10:18, and said
the aircraft was 60 miles out. He again asked for authorization to engage. The Vice
President again said yes. The Secret Service was postulating the flight path of United 93,
not knowing it had already crashed.

Also at the conference room table was White House Deputy Chief of Staff Joshua Bolten.
Bolten watched the exchanges and, after what he called “a quiet moment,” suggested that
the Vice President get in touch with the President and confirm the engage order. Bolten
told us he wanted to make sure the President was told that the Vice President had
executed the order. He said he had not heard any prior conversation on the subject with
the President. The Vice President was logged calling the President at 10:18 for a two-
minute call that obtained the confirmation. On Air Force One, at 10:20, the President’s
press secretary, Ari Fleischer, noted that the President told him he had authorized a
shootdown of aircraft, if necessary.

Minutes went by and word arrived of an aircraft down over Pennsylvania. Those in the
conference room wondered if perhaps the aircraft had been shot down pursuant to these
directions.

At approximately 10:30, the shelter started receiving reports of another hijacked plane,
this time only five to ten miles out. Believing they had only a minute or two, once again
the Vice President communicated authority to “engage” or “take out” the airborne
aircraft. At 10:33, Deputy National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley passed that
guidance on the Air Threat Conference call: “I need to get word to Dick Myers that our
reports are there’s an inbound aircraft flying low 5 miles out. The Vice President’s
guidance was we need to take them out….”

Once again, there was no immediate information about the fate of the inbound aircraft.
As one witness to the event described, “It drops below the radar screen, and it’s just
continually hovering in your imagination; you don’t know where it is or what happens to
it.” Eventually, the shelter received word that the alleged hijacker five miles away had
been a Medevac helicopter.

Transmission of the Authorization from the White House to the Pilots

The National Military Command Center learned of the hijacking of United 93 at about
10:03. The FAA had not yet been connected to the Air Threat Conference and in general
had practically no contact with the military at the level of national command. The
NMCC instead received news about the hijacking of United 93 from the White House.
The White House had received the word from the Secret Service’s contacts with the
FAA.

NORAD had no information either. In response to questions, the NORAD representative
on the Air Threat Conference stated at 10:07: “NORAD has no indication of a hijack



                                                                                       25
heading to Washington DC at this time.”

Repeatedly between 10:14 and 10:19, a lieutenant colonel at the White House relayed the
information to the National Military Command Center that the Vice President had
confirmed fighters were cleared to engage the inbound aircraft if they could verify that
the aircraft was hijacked.

The commander of NORAD, General Eberhart, was en route to the NORAD operations
center in Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado when the shoot down order was communicated
on the Air Threat Conference. He told us that by the time he arrived at the Mountain the
order had already been passed down the NORAD chain of command.

It is not clear how the shoot down order was communicated to the Continental Region
headquarters. But we know that, at 10:31, General Larry Arnold instructed his staff to
broadcast the following message over a NORAD chat log: “10:31 Vice president has
cleared to us to intercept tracks of interest and shoot them down if they do not respond,
per CONR CC [General Arnold].”

In upstate New York, NEADS personnel first learned of the shoot down order from that
chat log message:

       Floor Leadership: You need to read this...The Region Commander has declared
       that we can shoot down aircraft that do not respond to our direction. Copy that?

       Controllers: Copy that, sir.

       Floor Leadership: So if you’re trying to divert somebody and he won’t divert—

       Controllers: DO [Director of Operations] is saying no.

       Floor Leadership: No? It came over the chat… You got a conflict on that
       direction?

       Controllers: Right now no, but—

       Floor Leadership: Okay? Okay, you read that from the Vice President, right?
       Vice President has cleared. Vice President has cleared us to intercept traffic and
       shoot them down if they do not respond per CONR CC [General Arnold].

In interviews with us, NEADS personnel expressed considerable confusion over the
nature and effect of the order.

Indeed, the NEADS Commander told us he did not pass along the order because he was
unaware of its ramifications. Both the mission commander and the weapons director
indicated they did not pass the order to the fighters circling Washington and New York



                                                                                            26
City because they were unsure how the pilots would, or should, proceed with this
guidance. In short, while leaders in Washington believed the fighters circling above them
had been instructed to “take out” hostile aircraft, the only orders actually conveyed to the
Langley pilots were to “ID type and tail.”

In most cases the chain of command in authorizing the use of force runs from the
President to the Secretary of Defense and from the Secretary to the combatant
commander. The President apparently spoke to Secretary Rumsfeld briefly sometime
after 10:00, but no one can recall any content beyond a general request to alert forces.
The President and the Secretary did not discuss the use of force against hijacked airliners
in this conversation.

The Secretary did not become part of the chain of command for those orders to engage
until he arrived in the NMCC. At 10:39, the Vice President tried to bring the Secretary
up to date as both participated in the Air Threat Conference:

       Vice President: There’s been at least three instances here where we’ve had
       reports of aircraft approaching Washington—a couple were confirmed hijack.
       And, pursuant to the President’s instructions I gave authorization for them to be
       taken out. Hello?

       SecDef: Yes, I understand. Who did you give that direction to?

       Vice President: It was passed from here through the operations center at the
       White House, from the [shelter].

       SecDef: OK, let me ask the question here. Has that directive been transmitted to
       the aircraft?

       Vice President: Yes, it has.

       SecDef: So we’ve got a couple of aircraft up there that have those instructions at
       the present time?

       Vice President: That is correct. And it’s my understanding they’ve already taken
       a couple of aircraft out.

       SecDef: We can’t confirm that. We’re told that one aircraft is down but we do
       not have a pilot report that they did it.

As this exchange shows, Secretary Rumsfeld was not involved when the shoot down
order was first passed on the Air Threat Conference. After the Pentagon was hit,
Secretary Rumsfeld went to the parking lot to assist with rescue efforts. He arrived in the
National Military Command Center shortly before 10:30. He told us he was just gaining
situational awareness when he spoke with the Vice President, and that his primary



                                                                                          27
concern was ensuring that the pilots had a clear understanding of their rules of
engagement.

The Vice President was mistaken in his belief that shoot down authorization had been
passed to the pilots flying at NORAD’s direction. By 10:45 there was, however, another
set of fighters circling Washington that had entirely different rules of engagement. These
fighters, part of the 113th Wing of the DC Air National Guard, launched out of Andrews
Air Force Base based on information passed to them by the Secret Service. The first of
the Andrews fighters was airborne at 10:38.

General Wherley—the commander of the 113th Wing—reached out to the Secret Service
after hearing second hand reports that it wanted fighters airborne. A Secret Service agent
had a phone in each ear, one to Wherley and one to a fellow agent at the White House,
relaying instructions that the White House agent said he was getting from the Vice
President. The guidance for Wherley was to send up the aircraft, with orders to protect
the White House and take out any aircraft that threatens the Capitol. General Wherley
translated this in military terms to “weapons free,” which means the decision to shoot
rests in the cockpit, or in this case the cockpit of the lead pilot. He passed these
instructions to the pilots that launched at 10:42 and afterward.

Thus, while the fighter pilots under NORAD direction who had scrambled out of Langley
never received any type of engagement order, the Andrews pilots were operating under
“weapons free”—a permissive rule of engagement. The President and the Vice President
told us they had not been aware that fighters had been scrambled out of Andrews, at the
request of the Secret Service and outside of the military chain of command.

Reflections on United 93

Had it not crashed in Pennsylvania at 10:03, we estimate that United 93 could not have
reached Washington, DC any earlier than 10:13, and most probably would have arrived
before 10:23. We examined the military’s ability to intercept it.

There was only one set of fighters orbiting Washington, DC during this timeframe—the
Langley F-16s. They were armed and under NORAD's control.

But the Langley pilots were never briefed about the reason they were scrambled. As the
lead pilot explained, "I reverted to the Russian threat…I’m thinking cruise missile threat
from the sea. You know you look down and see the Pentagon burning and I thought the
bastards snuck one by us. . . . [Y]ou couldn’t see any airplanes, and no one told us
anything.” The pilots knew their mission was to identify and divert aircraft flying within
a certain radius of Washington, but did not know that the threat came from hijacked
commercial airliners.

Also, NEADS did not know where United 93 was when it first heard about the hijacking
from FAA at 10:07. Presumably FAA would have provided the information, but we do



                                                                                         28
not know how long it would have taken, nor how long it would have taken NEADS to
find and track the target on its own equipment.

Once the target was known and identified, NEADS needed orders to pass to the pilots.
Shoot down authority was first communicated to NEADS at 10:31. Given the clear
attack on the United States, it is also possible—though unlikely—that NORAD
commanders could have ordered the shoot down without the authorization communicated
by the Vice President.

NORAD officials have maintained that they would have intercepted and shot down
United 93. We are not so sure. We are sure that the nation owes a debt to the passengers
of United 93. Their actions saved the lives of countless others, and may have saved
either the U.S. Capitol or the White House from destruction.

The details of what happened on the morning of September 11 are complex. But the
details play out a simple theme. NORAD and the FAA were unprepared for the type of
attacks launched against the United States on September 11, 2001. They struggled, under
difficult circumstances, to improvise a homeland defense against an unprecedented
challenge they had never encountered and had never trained to meet.




                                                                                      29
