2000 WI App 50

COURT OF APPEALS OF WISCONSIN
PUBLISHED OPINION
Case No.:

98-2889
†Petition for Review filed.

Complete Title
of Case:
JOHN A. BALCERZAK,
PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT, †
V.

BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
FOR THE CITY OF MILWAUKEE AND
CHIEF OF POLICE PHILIP ARREOLA, OR HIS SUCCESSOR,
DEFENDANTS-JOINT-APPELLANTS.

Opinion Filed:
Submitted on Briefs:
Oral Argument:

February 15, 2000
November 2, 1999
---

JUDGES:
Concurred:
Dissented:

Wedemeyer, P.J., Schudson and Curley, JJ.
Schudson, J.
Schudson, J.

Appellant
ATTORNEYS:

Respondent
ATTORNEYS:

On behalf of the defendant-appellant Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners for the City of Milwaukee, the cause was submitted on
the briefs of James C. Reiher and Maureen A. Hegarty of VonBriesen,
Purtell & Roper, S.C., of Milwaukee. On behalf of the defendantappellant Chief of Police, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Grant
F. Langley, city attorney, and Rudolph M. Konrad, deputy city attorney.

On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the
brief of Laurie A. Eggert and Jonathan Cermele of Eggert Law Office,
S.C., of Milwaukee.

COURT OF APPEALS
DECISION
DATED AND FILED
February 15, 2000
Cornelia G. Clark
Acting Clerk, Court of Appeals
of Wisconsin

NOTICE
This opinion is subject to further editing. If
published, the official version will appear in the
bound volume of the Official Reports.
A party may file with the Supreme Court a
petition to review an adverse decision by the
Court of Appeals. See WIS. STAT. § 808.10 and
RULE 809.62.

No. 98-2889
STATE OF WISCONSIN

IN COURT OF APPEALS

JOHN A. BALCERZAK,
PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT,
V.

BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
FOR THE CITY OF MILWAUKEE AND
CHIEF OF POLICE PHILIP ARREOLA, OR HIS SUCCESSOR,
DEFENDANTS-JOINT-APPELLANTS.

APPEAL from an order of the circuit court for Milwaukee County:
CHRISTOPHER R. FOLEY, Judge. Reversed.
Before Wedemeyer, P.J., Schudson and Curley, JJ.
¶1

CURLEY, J.

The City of Milwaukee Board of Fire and Police

Commissioners (FPC) and the Chief of Police (Chief) appeal the circuit court’s
grant of summary judgment to Milwaukee Police Officer John A. Balcerzak in

No. 98-2889

Balcerzak’s disciplinary proceeding. The FPC and the Chief assert that the circuit
court erred in finding that the statutory language found in WIS. STAT. § 62.50(17)
(1989-90),1 “be suspended without pay for a period not exceeding 60 days,” was
unambiguous. Further, the FPC and the Chief claim that the circuit court erred in
deciding that the holding in State ex rel. Smits v. City of De Pere Board of Police
& Fire Commissioners, 104 Wis. 2d 26, 310 N.W.2d 607 (1981), was dispositive
and that, as a result, the FPC exceeded its jurisdiction in suspending Balcerzak for
sixty working days.

We conclude that the clause found in § 62.50(17) is

ambiguous and that the Smits case is not dispositive. In applying the rules of
statutory construction, we are persuaded that the FPC’s and the Chief’s
interpretation of the statute—that suspensions must be applied to working days—
is correct, as evidenced by its twenty-year practice of issuing suspensions for
working days. Thus, we reverse.
I. BACKGROUND.
¶2

The circumstances surrounding this litigation began on July 22,

1991, when Milwaukee Police Officers John Balcerzak and Joseph Gabrish
responded to a citizen complaint. Upon arriving at the dispatched location, the
officers encountered the now infamous serial killer, Jeffrey Dahmer, and his
victim, Konerak Sinthasomphone.

After conducting a brief investigation, the

officers released Sinthasomphone, who was a minor, into Dahmer’s care. Dahmer
murdered Sinthasomphone shortly thereafter.

When the officers’ decision to

release Sinthasomphone to Dahmer became public, the then-Chief of Police
1

Unless otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the 1989-90 version of the
Wisconsin Statutes.

2

No. 98-2889

dismissed the officers from the Milwaukee Police Department for violating
various department rules during their investigation. Both officers appealed their
dismissals to the FPC, which upheld their discharges.
¶3

The officers appealed the FPC’s decision to the circuit court

pursuant to WIS. STAT. § 62.50(20).2 The circuit court found that discharging the
officers was an unreasonable discipline and remanded the matter to the FPC,
suggesting that, under all the circumstances, discipline consisting of a “suspension
not to exceed sixty days would more appropriately serve the ends of justice.” In
effect, the circuit court recommended that the FPC apply the maximum period of
suspension permitted under § 62.50(17).3 The FPC, in response to the circuit
2

WISCONSIN STAT. § 62.50(20), provides:
Police and fire departments in 1st class cities.
(20) CIRCUIT COURT REVIEW; NOTICE. Any officer or member
of either department discharged, suspended or reduced, may,
within 10 days after the decision and findings under this section
are filed with the secretary of the board, bring an action in the
circuit court of the county in which the city is located to review
the order. Such action shall begin by the serving of a notice on
the secretary of the board making such order and on the city
attorney of such city, which notice may be in the following or
similar form ….

3

WISCONSIN STAT. § 62.50(17) provides:
(17) DECISION. Within 3 days after hearing the matter the
board shall, by a majority vote of its members, determine
whether by a preponderance of the evidence the charges are
sustained. If the board determines that the charges are sustained,
the board shall at once determine whether the good of the service
requires that the accused be permanently discharged or be
suspended without pay for a period not exceeding 60 days or
reduced in rank. If the charges are not sustained the accused
shall be immediately reinstated in his or her former position,
without prejudice. The decision and findings of the board shall
be in writing and shall be filed, together with a transcript of the
evidence, with the secretary of the board.
(continued)

3

No. 98-2889

court’s suggestion, vacated the discharge of both officers and suspended them
without pay for a period of 60 days. The FPC then authorized the Milwaukee
Police Department to determine the actual dates of the suspension. In response to
the FPC’s order, the department reinstated the officers and ordered that they be
suspended “without pay for sixty (60) consecutive workdays effective 11-27-92,”
in accordance with its long-standing practice of applying suspensions to working
days.
¶4

This disciplinary order was also appealed to the circuit court by both

officers.4 Balcerzak filed a summary judgment motion, which the circuit court
granted. The circuit court determined that the Chief and the FPC exceeded their
jurisdiction when they suspended Balcerzak for sixty working days. The circuit
court concluded that the term “days” found in WIS. STAT. § 62.50(17), was not
ambiguous, and that the holding in Smits mandated that the suspension be applied
to calendar days. As a result, the circuit court granted Balcerzak’s summary
judgment motion, ordering the FPC to “define the length of [Balcerzak’s]
disciplinary suspension as 60 calendar days.” The circuit court further ordered
that Balcerzak be restored any rights that he may have lost as a result of the longer
suspension.
Standard of Review
¶5

This is an appeal from an order of the circuit court on certiorari

review of the FPC’s decision suspending Balcerzak for sixty working days. “On

4

Before the circuit court rendered a decision, Joseph Gabrish’s case was resolved by
stipulation.

4

No. 98-2889

review of a trial court’s decision in a certiorari proceeding, our standard of review
is the same as that of the trial court and we decide the merits of the matter
independently of the trial court’s decision.”

State ex rel. Town of Norway

Sanitary Dist. No. 1 v. Racine County Drainage Bd. of Comm’rs, 220 Wis. 2d
595, 605, 583 N.W.2d 437 (Ct. App. 1998).

Here, the circuit court granted

summary judgment to Balcerzak. Our review of summary judgment is de novo.
See Green Spring Farms v. Kersten, 136 Wis. 2d 304, 313-15, 401 N.W.2d 816
(1987).

The standards for summary judgment are set forth in WIS. STAT.

§ 802.08, and have been summarized in many cases. See, e.g., id. at 315 (setting
out the “standard methodology which a trial court follows when faced with a
motion for summary judgment”). They do not bear repeating here. We have also
been called upon to interpret WIS. STAT. § 62.50(17). “The interpretation of a
statute is a question of law which this court reviews independently, without
deference to the lower courts.” State v. Sweat, 208 Wis. 2d 409, 414-15, 561
N.W.2d 695 (1997).
II. ANALYSIS.
A. WISCONSIN STAT. § 62.50(17) is ambiguous.
¶6

Chapter 62 of the Wisconsin Statutes regulates cities in Wisconsin.

First class cities are defined in WIS. STAT. § 62.05(1)(a), as “cities of one hundred
and fifty thousand population and over.” The regulations pertaining to police and
fire departments of first class cities can be found in WIS. STAT. § 62.50. Pursuant
to § 62.50(11), a police chief may discharge or suspend an officer for more than
thirty days only for cause and only after a trial is conducted before the FPC.
Under § 62.50(17), if the FPC sustains the charges after a trial, the FPC is given
the authority to permanently discharge an officer or suspend the officer “without
5

No. 98-2889

pay for a period not exceeding 60 days or reduced in rank.” The FPC contends
that this language is ambiguous because to give effect to the language “without
pay” requires the suspension to be applied to the officer’s working days, while the
words “not to exceed sixty days” suggest that the suspension be applied to
calendar days.
¶7

“‘[A] statutory provision is ambiguous if reasonable minds could

differ as to its meaning.’” UFE, Inc. v. LIRC, 201 Wis. 2d 274, 283, 548 N.W.2d
57 (1996) (citation omitted). “When construing a statutory provision, the entire
section and related sections of the statute should be considered.” Sweat, 208
Wis. 2d at 416. “Ambiguity can be found in the words of the statutory provision
itself, or by the words of the provision as they interact with and relate to other
provisions in the statute and to other statutes.” Id. at 416.
¶8

As noted, WIS. STAT. § 62.50 applies only to first class cities and

sets forth the manner and procedure for disciplinary actions and the types of
discipline permitted. Section 62.50(17) states that the length of a suspension
cannot exceed sixty days, but it also directs that suspensions must be without pay.
Inasmuch as the statute’s subject matter deals with the imposition of discipline on
officers and contains the directive that suspensions be without pay, the language
following it—“not to exceed sixty days”—presents a conundrum. This is so
because in order to follow the requirement that the suspension be without pay, a
suspension of time must be applied to days when the officer would ordinarily
work. As observed by the FPC in its briefs, a one-day suspension applied to a day
off would run afoul of the statutory directive that suspensions be “without pay.”
On the other hand, if the literal meaning of “not to exceed 60 days” is followed,
the suspension would have to be applied to sixty calendar days. Because either

6

No. 98-2889

interpretation of the statute is reasonable, we conclude that the phrase is
ambiguous.
B. The Smits holding does not apply to WISCONSIN STAT.
§ 62.50(17).
¶9

Balcerzak argues that the holding in Smits controls the result of this

case and requires us to conclude that suspensions must be applied to calendar
days. We decline to apply the holding in Smits to this case because Smits did not
interpret the statute in dispute here, nor did it involve a long-standing policy to
apply suspensions to work days. Further, our reading of Smits suggests it was
fact-intensive, requiring us to read it narrowly.
¶10

Thomas Smits was a police officer for the City of De Pere. The

chief of police brought nine charges of misconduct against him.

Unlike the

Milwaukee Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, whose disciplinary powers
are defined in WIS. STAT. § 62.50, the De Pere Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners’ disciplinary powers are found in WIS. STAT. § 62.13.
respect to officer discipline, § 62.13(5), in pertinent part, permits:
(e) If the board determines that the charges are not
sustained, the accused, if he has been suspended, shall be
immediately reinstated and all lost pay restored. If the
board determines that the charges are sustained, the
accused, by order of the board, may be suspended or
reduced in rank, or suspended and reduced in rank, or
removed, as the good of the service may require.
(f) Findings and determinations hereunder and orders of
suspension, reduction, suspension and reduction, or
removal, shall be in writing and, if they follow a hearing,
shall be filed within 3 days thereof with the secretary of the
board.
(g) Further rules for the administration of this subsection
may be made by the board.
(h) No person shall be deprived of compensation while
suspended pending disposition of charges.
7

With

No. 98-2889

The De Pere Board of Police and Fire Commissioners sustained seven of the
charges brought by the Chief and terminated Smits. Smits appealed the Board’s
decision and the trial court, finding that four of the charges could not be
substantiated, remanded the matter to the Board for a reevaluation of its sanction.
Instead of promptly complying with the trial court’s remand, the Board waited
three months before it acted on the trial court’s directive. Finally, at this delayed
proceeding, the Board merely reaffirmed its earlier decision to terminate Smits.
¶11

The officer again appealed to the trial court and, again, the trial court

reversed the board’s determination. This time the trial court’s order contained the
directive that Smits should be reinstated “forthwith with pay … as though he had
been in continuous s[er]vice.” Smits, 104 Wis. 2d at 30. The order also suggested
that “suspension without pay not to exceed one year” would be a more appropriate
exercise of discretion by the board. Id. at 29 (emphasis omitted). The Board
failed to follow the trial court’s order and neither reinstated Smits with pay nor
adopted the trial court’s disciplinary suggestion. The Board elected to issue an
amended order on the same day the trial court entered its order which retroactively
suspended Smits for a period of fifty-two work weeks without pay. This order
was ultimately appealed, and this court, as did the trial court, concluded that the
Board acted within its jurisdiction and applied a correct theory of law in
retroactively suspending Smits for fifty-two work weeks. See id. at 30.
¶12

On appeal, the supreme court determined that the board’s failure to

accept the trial court’s suggested punishment of “suspension without pay not to
exceed one year” was an arbitrary and capricious act. Id. at 37-38. It ordered that
the suspension be applied to a calendar year. See id. at 38. It is this holding that

8

No. 98-2889

Balcerzak argues should govern our interpretation of the statutory language found
in WIS. STAT. § 62.50(17). We are not persuaded.
¶13

First, we observe that the statute in question, WIS. STAT.

§ 62.50(17), was not interpreted in Smits. As noted, the De Pere Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners is regulated by an entirely different statute than that
regulating Milwaukee’s Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, and the types of
discipline afforded to the Boards are different.

Second, in Smits, when the

supreme court determined that a year suspension meant a calendar year, it did so
in a different context than that presented here. The supreme court viewed the
failure of the Board to follow the trial court’s suggested parameter on discipline as
further evidence of its ongoing arbitrary and capricious conduct.
The board, in refusing to impose a penalty that was
within Judge Parins’ guideline, engaged in arbitrary and
capricious action. As this court has stated in Olson v.
Rothwell, 28 Wis. 2d 233, 137 N.W.2d 86 (1965):
“Arbitrary or capricious action on the part of an
administrative agency occurs when it can be said that such
action is unreasonable or does not have a rational basis.
Arbitrary action is the result of an unconsidered, wilful and
irrational choice of conduct and not the result of the
‘winnowing and sifting’ process.” Id. at 239 (citations
omitted). In refusing to impose a penalty that was within
judicial parameters, the board acted in excess of its
jurisdiction.

Smits, 104 Wis. 2d at 37-38. In Smits, it is apparent that the supreme court was
responding to the Board’s recalcitrance when it required the Board to reduce its
suspension to a calendar year suspension. This is evidenced by the supreme
court’s statements that it was “troubled by the actions of what we can only
perceive to be a recalcitrant board,” id. at 36, and “[t]he board, perhaps engaging
in a game of semantics, suspended petitioner for fifty-two (52) work weeks, which
9

No. 98-2889

is the equivalent of fifteen (15) months and twelve (12) days,” id. at 37. The
supreme court never addressed whether all suspensions must be for calendar days.
In fact, there is no discussion in the case about the efficacy of work-day
suspensions.

Third, Smits involved no long-standing policy of applying

suspensions to work days. As will be discussed later, the application of a longstanding policy presents a different legal question than that posed in Smits. As a
consequence, we read Smits narrowly and we conclude that the supreme court
directed that Smits’s one-year suspension be counted in calendar days simply
because the Board’s decision to apply a work day suspension was further evidence
of the Board’s resistance to the trial court’s order. Thus, in our view, Smits does
not ban the use of work-day suspensions.
¶14

In contrast to Smits, we see no evidence here that the FPC was

resisting the trial court’s orders. In fact, the record reveals that the chairman of the
FPC declared, “[t]he Commission, regardless of its view of the merits of the
Court’s ruling and order, must at this time obey and enforce the Court’s order.”
Nor do we see the imposition of a work day suspension in this instance to be an
act of resistance by the board. Rather, the application of suspensions to work days
was the long-standing practice of the department. As a result, we decline to apply
the implication found in Smits that suspensions must always be applied to calendar
days.
C. In applying the rules of statutory construction, we conclude that
the interpretation given to WISCONSIN STAT. § 62.50(17) by the
FPC is correct.
¶15

Having decided that the statutory language is ambiguous and that

Smits is inapposite, we look to the rules of statutory construction for resolution of
the conflict. See Hull v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 222 Wis. 2d 627,
10

No. 98-2889

641-42, 586 N.W.2d 863 (1998) (“If the statute is ambiguous, the court turns to
extrinsic aids such as the statute’s purpose, context, scope and history to ascertain
the intent of the legislature.”).
¶16

As noted, little information about the correct interpretation can be

gleaned from reading the statute, nor does our review of the legislative history
provide any guidance in resolving the ambiguity. Thus, we next consider the
interpretation given the statute by the FPC.

The FPC urges us to give its

administrative interpretation of the statute great weight deference. See UFE, 201
Wis. 2d at 284.

The department’s policy, instituted over twenty years ago,

requires all suspensions to apply to an officer’s working days.

It has been

consistently approved by the FPC. “‘Long and uninterrupted practice under a
statute, especially by the officers whose duty it was to execute it, is good evidence
of its construction, and such practical construction will be adhered to, even
though, were it res integra, it might be difficult to maintain it.’” Trczyniewski v.
City of Milwaukee, 15 Wis. 2d 236, 240, 112 N.W.2d 725 (1961) (citation
omitted) (quoting Harrington v. Smith, 28 Wis. 43, 68 (1871)). We are satisfied
that the FPC policy deserves great weight deference because the interpretation of
the statute is of long standing.
¶17

It is undisputed that the Milwaukee Police Department has

universally applied suspensions to working days since 1976 and that the FPC has
ratified this policy for the same length of time. The record reveals that this
method was adopted because of concerns that to do otherwise might lead to
inconsistent suspensions and fears that applying calendar day suspensions might
violate the Fair Labor Standards Act. For over twenty years this policy has
remained unchanged and unchallenged. We are satisfied that this fact is “‘good
evidence of its construction.’” Id. (citation omitted).
11

No. 98-2889

¶18

Further, the flaws of applying suspensions to calendar days is readily

apparent by a simple example. If two officers who engage in identical misconduct
are both suspended for five days and the calendar day approach is used, their
suspensions could well result in unequal treatment as one may be working less
days during the five calendar days, and thus, lose less pay. In order to equalize the
suspensions, the officer with fewer working days during the suspension would
have to be suspended for longer than five days. Should this occur, the officers
would be entitled to different appeal rights because pursuant to WIS. STAT.
§ 62.50(13), an officer who has been suspended for more than five days is
provided a direct appeal to the FPC, while a suspension for five days or less
requires arbitration. Thus, under our hypothetical, application of the calendar day
suspension can produce uneven results. Inasmuch as these inequalities can be
avoided by using work-day suspensions, we conclude that it is logical, in
interpreting the language of § 62.50(17), to suspend officers on working days.
¶19

Because we are required to give the FPC’s interpretation great

weight deference due to its long-standing policy of applying suspensions to
working days, and because we are satisfied that the FPC’s interpretation of the
language “suspended without pay for a period not exceeding 60 days” means
suspended on working days, is the more logical interpretation, we adopt the FPC’s
interpretation. Accordingly, we reverse the order of the circuit court and affirm
the order of the FPC.
By the Court.—Order reversed.

12

No. 98-2889(CD)

¶20

SCHUDSON, J.

(concurring in part; dissenting in part).

Although I agree we must reverse the circuit court’s summary judgment, I depart
from the majority’s interpretation of “without pay” under WIS. STAT. § 62.50(17)
(1989-90). I would remand for further fact-finding essential to resolution of the
issue on appeal.
¶21

In its memorandum decision, the circuit court recognized that “when

an officer is suspended without pay, he looses [sic] his police power and all of his
paid health insurance (if he is suspended for more than 30 calendar days).” Thus,
the circuit court decision accepted Balcerzak’s argument: (1) Police officers, on
their off-days, retain law enforcement authority and off-duty responsibility, and
also retain employee benefits such as health insurance. (2) When suspended for
more than thirty calendar days “without pay,” police officers lose their health
insurance unless they pay the premiums.5 (3) Therefore a suspension of sixty days

5

In its brief to this court, the City writes:
Obviously, if an officer is not receiving his or her paycheck for
60 days, the officer’s portion of the health insurance premium
will not be paid, because no paycheck is issued from which it
can be deducted. There is nothing in § 62.50(17), Stats., or the
police department suspension that prevents the suspended officer
from maintaining his health insurance by paying the premium
out of his or her pocket.

Presumably, therefore, to maintain the benefits, the officer would have to pay, out of pocket, both
the portion of the premium that would have been deducted from the paycheck and the portion the
City would have paid.

No. 98-2889(CD)

“without pay” logically would include the off-days on which the officers lose the
City’s payment of their health insurance premiums.
¶22

“Pay” is defined as “compensation,” “wages,” and “salary.”

BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY 1128 (6th ed. 1990).6 “Compensation,” “wages,” and
“salary” are defined in many expansive terms that would include benefits. The
definitions of “compensation” include “recompense in value,” and “recompense
… for … service.” Id. at 283. “Wages” is defined as:
A compensation given to a hired person for his or her
services. Compensation of employees based on time
worked or output of production.
Every form of remuneration payable for a given
period to an individual for personal services, including
salaries, commissions, vacation pay, dismissal wages,
bonuses and reasonable value of board, rent, housing,
lodging, payments in kind, tips, and any other similar
advantage received from the individual’s employer or
directly with respect to work for him. Term should be
broadly defined and includes not only periodic monetary
earnings but also all compensation for services rendered
without regard to manner in which such compensation is
computed.

Id. at 1579 (citations omitted). And the first definition of “[s]alary” is “[a] reward
or recompense for services performed.” Id. at 1337. Thus, as defined and, I think,
as generally understood, “pay” includes benefits. Therefore, to the extent that
police officers lose benefits even on what would have been off-days during their
suspensions, they are “without pay” on those days as well.

6

I note that the most recent edition of Black’s contains no definition of “pay.” See
BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY 1150 (7th ed. 1999).

2

No. 98-2889(CD)

¶23

Unfortunately, the trial court record does not clarify the way in

which the Board computes days on which benefits are lost. The affidavit of
Bradley DeBraska, president of the Milwaukee Police Association, states:
When a Milwaukee police officer is suspended
without pay, the Milwaukee Police Department requires the
officer to surrender his gun, badge and all other indicia of
police authority. The MPD informs the officer that he no
longer has any police powers during the time that he is
suspended.
A suspension without pay which lasts longer than 30
calendar days affects a police officer’s right to receive
health insurance premiums paid by the City. If an officer is
suspended for more than 30 calendar days, the City will
not pay premiums for the officer’s health insurance
benefits.

(Underlining added.) This begs certain computation questions, the answers to
which could dictate the calculation of which days are truly “without pay.” Most
simply, the questions may reduce to one: When a suspension lasts longer than 30
calendar days, does the City “not pay premiums for the officer’s health insurance
benefits” for the entire suspension period, or “not pay premiums” only for those
days exceeding thirty?
¶24

Accepting Balcerzak’s premise that “pay” includes benefits, two

scenarios emerge:
(1) During a suspension not lasting longer than thirty calendar days, an officer
would not be “without pay” on off-days because the City still would be paying

3

No. 98-2889(CD)

for benefits.

Therefore, contrary to Balcerzak’s argument, calculation of

“without pay” days would include only workdays.7
(2) During a suspension lasting longer than thirty calendar days, an officer would
be “without pay” on every day–workdays and off-days–for which the City
would not be paying for benefits.

Therefore, consistent with Balcerzak’s

argument, calculation of “without pay” days would include workdays, and all
off-days for which the City would not be paying for the officer’s benefits.
In short, to be logically consistent, Balcerzak, in essense, must be saying: “(1)
Benefits are part of my ‘pay.’ (2) If the City continues to pay for my benefits on
off-days, I am not ‘without pay’ on those days off. (3) But when the City, in the
course of suspending me for more than thirty calendar days, discontinues paying
for my benefits–on both workdays and off-days–I am ‘without pay’ on all those
days and, therefore, the off-days must be credited toward my ‘without pay’
suspension days.”
¶25

“[U]niformity and consistency” in the application of a statute are

appropriate considerations in interpreting statutory language. State ex rel. Parker
v. Sullivan, 184 Wis. 2d 668, 699, 517 N.W.2d 449 (1994). Moreover, where
“uniformity and consistency” have been achieved by an agency’s previously
unchallenged statutory interpretation that is “of long-standing,” and where the
7

Even on those workdays, of course, the City still would be paying for benefits. Thus,
carrying Balcerzak’s premise to the extreme, even those workdays would not be “without pay.”
Balcerzak, however, does not take the counter-productive position that workdays during a
suspension lasting less than thirty days could only be credited against a suspension if the City
stopped paying for benefits. Thus, to some extent, Balcerzak seems to be seeking two different
rules–designating “without pay” days differently, depending on whether they occur during
suspensions of more than or less than thirty days.

4

No. 98-2889(CD)

agency’s interpretation does not “directly contravene[] the words of the statute,”
we defer to that interpretation. See id. at 699-700.
¶26

I agree with Balcerzak and the circuit court that “pay” includes

health insurance benefits. I observe, however, that acceptance of Balcerzak’s
premise may undermine his position, at least in suspensions of less than thirty
days.

From the record, however, I cannot determine whether the Board’s

application of the statute is uniform and consistent. Accordingly, I concur in this
court’s order reversing the circuit court order but respectfully dissent from part of
the majority’s rationale. I would remand for additional fact-finding in order to
determine the uniform and consistent application of the statute.

5

